# Nemotron-Climb Data Curation

TODO: Description here

## Step 0: Requirements

The following Python libraries are needed to run this tutorial:

- `nemo-curator`
- `xformers`
- `matplotlib`
- `megatron-core`
- `nemo-evaluator-launcher`
- `lightgbm`
- `seaborn`

NeMo Curator should be installed with the `text_cuda12` extra. See the installation options on the [Text Quickstart](https://docs.nvidia.com/nemo/curator/get-started/text) for more information. Installation commands for the other libraries above are included within their respective sections.

To run NeMo Curator, the following system requirements are needed:

- Ubuntu 22.04/20.04
- NVIDIA GPU with:
  - Volta™ or higher (compute capability 7.0+)
  - CUDA 12.x

Refer to the [Megatron Core Installation documentation](https://docs.nvidia.com/megatron-core/developer-guide/latest/get-started/install.html) for information about the system requirements for running Megatron-LM, which is used in step 6 of this tutorial.

## Step 1: Compute Embeddings

Compute text embeddings on the dataset with:

```bash
# run `uv pip install xformers` to use NovaSearch/stella_en_400M_v5 model

python 1_embed.py \
    --input-path /path/to/input/data/dir \
    --input-filetype "jsonl" \
    --output-path /path/to/computed_embeddings \
    --text-field "text" \
    --id-field "climb_id" \
    --use-sentence-transformer
```

At least 1 GPU is required to run this step. Use the `--num-cpus` and `--num-gpus` arguments as desired to control the number of CPUs and GPUs used by the Ray client. The script uses all available resources by default.

If the dataset already contains a unique ID field, feel free to omit the `--id-field` argument.

The script uses the [NovaSearch/stella_en_400M_v5](https://huggingface.co/NovaSearch/stella_en_400M_v5) embedding model by default:

- The [xFormers](https://github.com/facebookresearch/xformers) library is required to run the [NovaSearch/stella_en_400M_v5](https://huggingface.co/NovaSearch/stella_en_400M_v5) model and should be installed via `uv pip install xformers` before running the script.
- The [SentenceTransformers](https://huggingface.co/sentence-transformers) library is used via the `use-sentence-transformer` flag to enhance performance. It is already included as a dependency in Curator and does not need to be manually installed.

Some of the default parameters in the script include:

- Use `--model_inference_batch_size 1024` to create digestible batch sizes for the model forward pass. Adjust as necessary; decrease the size to address memory issues and increase the size to improve performance.
- Use [NovaSearch/stella_en_400M_v5](https://huggingface.co/NovaSearch/stella_en_400M_v5)'s `max_length` of 512 via the `--max-seq-length` argument
- Use `--padding-side "right"` and `--embedding_pooling="mean_pooling"` defaults as appropriate for the [NovaSearch/stella_en_400M_v5](https://huggingface.co/NovaSearch/stella_en_400M_v5) model
- Use `--transformers-init-kwargs "{'trust_remote_code': true}"` as required to load the [NovaSearch/stella_en_400M_v5](https://huggingface.co/NovaSearch/stella_en_400M_v5) model

See script for full list of parameters.

## Step 2: K-Means Clustering

Run K-Means clustering on the computed embeddings:

```bash
python 2_cluster.py \
    --input-path /path/to/computed_embeddings \
    --output-path /path/to/clusters \
    --text-field "text" \
    --id-field "climb_id" \
    --embedding-dim 3072 \
    --centroids-path /path/to/centroids
```

At least 1 GPU is required to run this step. Use the `--num-cpus` and `--num-gpus` arguments as desired to control the number of CPUs and GPUs used by the Ray client. The script uses all available resources by default.

The script uses `--n-clusters 1000` as the default. Set the `--embedding-dim` to 2-3x the embedding model's dimension to avoid GPU out-of-memory issues (the default dimension for [NovaSearch/stella_en_400M_v5](https://huggingface.co/NovaSearch/stella_en_400M_v5) is 1024, so set `--embedding-dim 3072`).

The `--id-field` generated from step 1 (or an existing ID column) is required. See script for full list of K-Means parameters.

## Step 2.5: Visualize Cluster Distances

Between steps 2 and 3, it is strongly recommended to run this helper script:

```bash
# run `uv pip install matplotlib` if not already installed

python plot_centroid_distances.py \
    --centroids-path /path/to/centroids
    --image-path /path/to/centroid_distance_histogram.png
```

Using the centroids generated by the clustering step, the script generates a histogram of the Euclidean distances between all `--n-clusters 1000` clusters. This plot should help inform the `--merge-threshold` value used in step 3. It is recommended to pick a merge threshold well below the main peak of the histogram. If the merge threshold is too large, then unrelated clusters may be merged with each other, or all clusters may be merged together into a single cluster (worst case scenario).

## Step 3: Cluster Pruning

Use a FastText model to prune the created clusters:

```bash
FASTTEXT_MODEL_PATHS=(
    /path/to/best_model_advertisement.bin
    /path/to/best_model_cultural_value.bin
    /path/to/best_model_educational_value.bin
    /path/to/best_model_informational_value.bin
    /path/to/best_model_quality.bin
)
FASTTEXT_SCORE_FIELDS=(
    advertisement_score
    cultural_value_score
    educational_value_score
    informational_value_score
    quality_score
)
python 3_prune.py \
    --input-path /path/to/clusters \
    --output-path /path/to/pruned_clusters \
    --fasttext-model-paths ${FASTTEXT_MODEL_PATHS[@]} \
    --score-fields ${FASTTEXT_SCORE_FIELDS[@]} \
    --text-field "text" \
    --centroids-path /path/to/centroids \
    --merge-threshold 1.5
```

No GPUs are needed to run this step, so by default the script sets `--num-gpus 0`. Use the `--num-cpus` argument as desired to control the number of CPUs used by the Ray client; by default, all are used. However, because each FastText model is large, CPU out-of-memory errors may occur due to overhead between stage workers. Try decreasing the number of CPUs if needed.

There are 5 FastText quality models that can be used for this step. Each can be pre-downloaded from Hugging Face:

TODO: Update links when the models are published

- [best_model_advertisement.bin](https://huggingface.co/nvidia)
- [best_model_cultural_value.bin](https://huggingface.co/nvidia)
- [best_model_educational_value.bin](https://huggingface.co/nvidia)
- [best_model_informational_value.bin](https://huggingface.co/nvidia)
- [best_model_quality.bin](https://huggingface.co/nvidia)

Users may opt to run the script with all 5 models as demonstrated above, or a subset of the models. For each path in `--fasttext-model-paths`, a unique score field must be set via the `--score-fields` argument.

After the FastText scores are computed, clusters with an average score less than `--pruning-threshold 1.0` are removed.

Finally, remaining clusters with a Euclidean distance closer than `--merge-threshold 1.5` are combined with each other. **It is strongly recommended to use step 2.5 to choose an appropriate merge threshold value.** The [Nemotron-CLIMB paper](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2504.13161) used a value of 1.5, which is quite large, to merge multiple terabytes of data and produce 21 "super clusters." For smaller datasets, a 1.5 threshold is almost certainly too large and may combine all of the data into a single cluster.

## Step 4: Convert to Tokenized Files

Generate `.bin` and `.idx` files for each cluster:

```bash
python 4_tokenize.py \
    --input-path /path/to/pruned_clusters \
    --output-path /path/to/domains \
    --hf-token "hf_XXX" \
    --append-eod
```

By default, the script tokenizes the text using [https://huggingface.co/meta-llama/Llama-2-7b](https://huggingface.co/meta-llama/Llama-2-7b), which is a gated model. The user can request access to it on Hugging Face and pass the `--hf-token` argument as demonstrated above.

The pipeline generates pairs of files with identical names: one with a `.bin` extension and another with a `.idx` extension. This ensures that the input data files are compatible with Megatron-LM, which is used in step 6 to train the proxy models. Megatron-LM refers to the filename without the file extension as the "file prefix."

## Step 5: Generate Training Data Mixtures

Generate a mixture of data ratios to be used for training the proxy models:

```bash
python 5_mixture.py \
    --input-path /path/to/domains \
    --output-path /path/to/mixtures \
    --num-mixtures 64
```

Using the `.bin` files generated by the previous step, the script calculates the token distribution across the files. It initializes a Dirichlet distribution based on each cluster's token count and sample configurations. The value of `--num-mixtures` mixtures are generated.

## Step 6: Train Proxy Models

Kick off a Megatron training job with a specified data mixture:

```bash
bash 6_train.sh \
    /path/to/Megatron-LM/pretrain_gpt.py \
    /path/to/mixtures/n1.sh \
    /path/to/megatron_exp/n1 \
    /path/to/Llama-2-7b/tokenizer.model
```

The above script requires Megatron-LM to be installed. System requirements and installation instructions can be found on the [Megatron Core Installation documentation](https://docs.nvidia.com/megatron-core/developer-guide/latest/get-started/install.html) page. If using Docker, make sure to obtain an NGC API key from the [NVIDIA NGC Catalog](https://catalog.ngc.nvidia.com/). Clone the Megatron-LM repository so that the [pretrain_gpt.py](https://github.com/NVIDIA/Megatron-LM/blob/main/pretrain_gpt.py) can be obtained directly.

For reference, the tutorial was developed and tested by following these steps:

- `docker run --runtime nvidia --gpus all --ipc=host --shm-size=16g -it --rm -v /path/to/data:/path/to/data -v /path/to/Curator:/path/to/Curator nvcr.io/nvidia/nemo:26.02.nemotron_3_super`
- `git clone --branch core_v0.16.0 https://github.com/NVIDIA/Megatron-LM.git`
  - Use the `core_v0.16.0` branch to ensure compatibility with `nvcr.io/nvidia/nemo:26.02.nemotron_3_super` and the arguments used in `6_train.sh`
- `bash /path/to/Curator/tutorials/text/nemotron-climb-data-curation/6_train.sh ...`

A proxy model can be trained for each of the data ratios generated by step 5. The above snippet trains a single proxy model using the first mixture. The script looks for 4 inputs in order:

- `PRETRAIN_GPT_PATH` (`/path/to/Megatron-LM/pretrain_gpt.py`): The path to Megatron-LM's [pretrain_gpt.py](https://github.com/NVIDIA/Megatron-LM/blob/main/pretrain_gpt.py) script cloned locally.
- `MIXTURE_SCRIPT` (`/path/to/mixtures/n1.sh`): The path to any of the mixture files generated by step 5.
- `WORK_PATH` (`/path/to/megatron_exp/n1`): The path to be used for checkpoints, caching, etc. The work path should be unique per training job.
- `TOKENIZER_MODEL` (`/path/to/Llama-2-7b/tokenizer.model`): The path to the tokenizer used in step 4.

If needed, download the tokenizer file with:

```python
from huggingface_hub import hf_hub_download

path = hf_hub_download(
    repo_id="meta-llama/Llama-2-7b",
    filename="tokenizer.model",
    token="hf_XXX",
)

print(path)
```

Since the goal is to train proxy models to compare against each other, the script triggers a timeout after roughly 2 hours via `--exit-duration-in-mins 110`. If 64 proxy models are trained, this amounts to roughly 120 hours spent training. Set a shorter runtime depending on available hardware and compute budgets.

See `6_train.sh` script for full list of parameters used during training and modify as desired. Tips and considerations are included in the comments of the script. Refer to the [Megatron Core documentation](https://docs.nvidia.com/megatron-core/developer-guide/latest/user-guide/training-examples.html) for more information.

By default, all available GPUs are used for training. The script was developed and tested on a single node; modifications are needed to adapt it for multi-node runs.

## Step 7: Evaluate Proxy Model

Evaluate the proxy model using NeMo Evaluator:

```bash
# TODO: Add script
```

TODO: Evaluator installation

TODO: Add more information

## Step 8: Train Predictor

Train a LightGBM model on the results with:

```bash
# TODO: install lightgbm
# run `uv pip install matplotlib` if not already installed
# run `uv pip install scipy` if not already installed
# run `uv pip install seaborn` if not already installed

python 8_predict.py
```

TODO: LightGBM installation

The script uses `matplotlib`, `seaborn`, and `scipy`, which can each be installed via `uv pip install`.

TODO: Add more information
